# MIMM4750G
## Data formats and scripting languages

---

# Why formats?

* Data that has been generated by equipment or retrieved from a database is written to a file in a particular configuration (format).
* A *file format* is a formal set of rules about how data are to be encoded into a file. 
* Otherwise, we cannot guarantee that the computer will retrieve the original data from a file.

---

# Tabular data

* Tables are a fundamental mode of organizing data
* Rows represent observations
* Columns represent variables
* A common export format for databases.

---

An excerpt of a table summarizing infectious disease prevalence in Britain (1965):

| Cases | Eng. & Wales | Grt. Lnd | Scot. | N.Ire. | [Eire](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89ire) |
|-------|--------------|----------|-------|--------|------|
| Diptheria | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 |  |
| Dysentry  | 482 | 85 | 136 | 5 | 2 |
| Encephatlis, acute | 2 | 0 |   | 0 |   |
| Enteric fever, typhoid | 3 | 1 | 4 | 1 |   |
| Measles | 3268 | 153 | 37 | 40 | 73 |

British Medical Journal from 1965 ([Graph and Table of Infectious Disease](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20790782))

---

# Comma-separated values (CSV)

* A common format for writing tabular data to a text file.
* Each row appears on a separate line.
* Values are separated by a reserved symbol (delimiter)
* If the value contains the delimiter, enclose the value in quotes.

```
Cases,Eng. & Wales,Grt. Lnd,Scot.,N.Ire.,Eire
Diptheria,0,0,1,0,
Dysentry,482,85,136,5,2
"Encephatlis, acute",2,0,,0,,
"Enteric fever, typhoid",3,1,4,1,
Measles,3268,153,37,40,73
```

---

# Sequence data formats

* Sequence data are more complicated.
* The relative position of a nucleotide or amino acid is significant.
* Different sequence lengths breaks a standard assumption of tabular data.
* We may need to associate sequences with complex metadata.

---

# Nucleotides

* [IUPAC](https://iupac.org/) defines the following symbols to represent nucleotides and their mixtures:

| Symbol | Bases | Symbol | Bases | Symbol | Bases |
|--------|-------|--------|-------|---------|-------|
| W | A,T | B | A,C,T | N | A,C,G,T |
| R | A,G | D | A,G,T | X | A,C,G,T |
| K | G,T | H | A,C,T |
| Y | C,T | V | A,C,G |
| S | C,G |
| M | A,C |

Can you think of a mnemonic for 2-fold mixtures?

---

# FASTA

* One of the most common file formats for sequence data.
* Every sequence record starts with a `>` symbol, followed by the sequence label (header).
* The sequence appears on subsequent lines until the next `>`.

```
>KP728283.1 Zaire ebolavirus isolate Ebola virus/H.sapiens-wt/CHE/2014/Makona-GE1, complete genome
GGATCTTTTGTGTGCGAATAACTATGAGGAAGATTAATAATTTTCCTCTCATTGAAATTTATATCGGAAT
TTAAATTGAAATTGTTACTGTAATCATACCTGGTTTGTTTCAGAGCCATATCACCAAGATAGAGAACAAC
```

---

# NEXUS

* The NEXUS format was designed to incorporate many different data types, including sequences.
* Data are organized into *blocks* enclosed by `BEGIN` and `END` tags.

```
#NEXUS
BEGIN DATA;
DIMENSIONS  NTAX=4 NCHAR=140;
FORMAT DATATYPE=DNA GAP=- MISSING=?;
MATRIX
AF084930.1 Proteus vulgaris  GGATCCGGGGAGGAAAGTCCGGGCTCC...
P.aeruginosa RNase P RNA     AGAGUCGAUUGGACAGUCGCUGUCGCG...
;
END;
```

---

# FASTQ format

* FASTQ is essentially an extension of the FASTA format to include quality scores.

```
@SRR5261740.1 1 length=295
AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGTACATGGGGACAGTGACCCTGATCTGGTAAAGCTC...
+SRR5261740.1 1 length=295
BBBBBFFFBFFFGGGGGGGGGGHHHHHHHHGGGGGHHHHGHHHGHHHHHHHHGHHHH...
```

* A *quality score* is the predicted probability that the base call is incorrect.
* To save space, this probability is transformed into a single character (more on this later!)

---

# Genbank format

* A very complex format that contains a diverse amount of information:

```
LOCUS       NC_014372              18935 bp    cRNA    linear   VRL 13-AUG-2018
DEFINITION  Tai Forest ebolavirus isolate Tai Forest
            virus/H.sapiens-tc/CIV/1994/Pauleoula-CI, complete genome.
ACCESSION   NC_014372
```

```
FEATURES             Location/Qualifiers
     source          1..18935
                     /organism="Tai Forest ebolavirus"
                     /mol_type="viral cRNA"
                     /isolate="Tai Forest virus/H.sapiens-tc/CIV/1994/Pauleoula-CI"
                     /host="Homo sapiens"
                     /db_xref="taxon:186541"
                     /country="Cote d'Ivoire"
                     /collection_date="Nov-1994"
                     /note="Ivory Coast ebolavirus"
```

---

# Converting between file formats

* One of the fundamental tasks in bioinformatics is the conversion of data from one format to another.
* Different programs write data to files in different formats, even when the data contain the same information.
* Converting formats is often a required step to feed the output of one program as input for another (building *pipelines*).

---

# EMBOSS Seqret

* https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/sfc/emboss_seqret/

---

# How do we really do it?

* Web interface not adequate for building an analysis pipeline
* Several open-source programs for converting formats:
  * Bio* libraries (*e.g.*, BioPython.SeqIO module)
  * [seqmagick](https://github.com/fhcrc/seqmagick), essentially a front-end for SeqIO
* but often we just have to do it ourselves -- this is why **scripting languages** are so popular.

---

# How Perl saved the Human Genome Project
An article in *The Perl Journal* by [Lincoln Stein](https://oicr.on.ca/investigators/lincoln-stein/)

* Project start date 1990, involving many groups.
* Estimated 1 to 10 terabytes needed to complete project.
* Different groups came up with different data exchange formats.

> Despite the fact that everyone was working on the same problems, no two groups took exactly the same approach.

---

# How Perl saved the Human Genome Project (2)

> The long range solution to this problem is to come up with uniform data interchange standards that genome software must adhere to. [...] However, standards require time to agree on...

* Perl enabled different groups to rapidly convert outputs to the other group's format.

---

# How Perl saved the Human Genome Project (3)

> Some groups attempted to build large monolithic systems on top of complex relational databases; they were thwarted time and again by the highly dynamic nature of biological research. By the time a system that could deal with the ins and outs of a complex laboratory protocol had been designed, implemented and debugged, the protocol had been superseded by new technology and the software engineers had to go back to the drawing board.

---

# What is Perl?

* Perl is a programming language.
* It is an *interpreted* language:

|             | Compiled | Interpreted |
|-------------|----------|-------------|
| Running     | Compile once | Interpret every time |
| Openness    | Distribute binaries | Distribute source |
| Performance | Faster | Slower |
| Development | Difficult | Easy |
| *Analogy*   | Buying a Tesla | Renting a bike |

---

# Perl is a scripting language

* "Scripting language" is difficult to define.
* Generally a script is a program that automates the execution of tasks.
* A scripting language is often developed using a compiled language - it operates at a higher (more abstract) level.
* (Like making macaroni and cheese with a Kraft Dinner mix instead of growing a wheat field, harvesting the grain, milling the grain into flour...)

---

# Perl was the backbone of bioinformatics

* Perl (Practical Extraction and Reporting Language) was developed by Larry Wall (first release 1987)
* The *lingua franca* of bioinformatics for many years.
* Reputation for enabling developers to do work quickly ("there's more than one way to do it"), but can be difficult to read.

---

A bit of Perl code by Illumina to find genome positions with an `N`

```
my $a=();
my $start=0;
#====finding Ns in the specified genomic range=====
open(IN, "$ARGV[0]"); #genome fasta
my @lines = <IN>;
close IN;
my $pos = $start;
my %Ns = ();
for($i=1;$i<@lines;$i++) #The 1st line is header
{
  chomp $lines[$i];
  @a = split //,$lines[$i];
  for($j=0;$j<@a;$j++) {
    if($a[$j] eq 'N') {
      $Ns{$pos} = 1;
    }
    $pos++;
  }
}
```

---

# Python

* Another scripting language developed by Guido van Rossum (first release 1990).
* "There should be one - and preferably only one - obvious way to do it."
* Notorious for whitespace requirements ("Readability counts.").
* Has overtaken Perl in popularity, even bioinformatics.

---

A conversion of the Illumina Perl code to Python
```python
import sys

# read filename from command line
infile = sys.argv[1]

handle = open(infile, 'rU')
_ = handle.readline()  # discard header line

Ns = []  # span multiple lines
for line in handle:
    # we assume that the line consists entirely of nucleotide sequence
    seq = line.strip('\n')
    for base in seq:
        Ns.append(1 if base == 'N' else 0)
```

---

# Suggested readings

* [How Perl Saved the Human Genome Project](https://web.stanford.edu/class/gene211/handouts/How_Perl_HGP.html)



